{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 Calibri;}}\fs22
\b Smart Irrigation System – Comprehensive Documentation (API + Remote Usage + System Overview)\b0\par
\par
\b 1) Overview\b0\par
Purpose: Provide real-time irrigation control, soil health analytics, and crop recommendations via a Flask web service integrated with an Arduino-based sensor/pump system.\par
Stack: Flask (Python), Pandas/NumPy/Plotly, scikit-learn (optional), HTML/CSS/JS, Arduino over serial.\par
Key files:\par
- water_harvest_dashboard.py (Flask server, serial IO, decisions, APIs)\par
- soil_health_monitor.py (historical soil analytics, charts, farmer summary)\par
- crop_recommendation.py (synthetic dataset, model training, recommendations)\par
- templates/*.html (UI pages)\par
- models/* (datasets, model pickles, metadata)\par
\par
\b 2) Environments and Base URLs\b0\par
- Local (same PC): http://127.0.0.1:5000\par
- Remote (public, tunnel): e.g., https://earlene-unrecognizable-vaughn.ngrok-free.dev\par
\par
When calling from another machine or a mobile app, replace the local base URL with your public tunnel domain.\par
\par
\b 3) HTML Pages (Full UI)\b0\par
- GET / – Main dashboard (live telemetry, decisions, alerts, log stats, controls)\par
- GET /soil-health – Soil Health Analytics (charts + farmer-friendly summary)\par
- GET /crop-recommend – Crop Recommendations (responsive on phones)\par
\par
\b 4) API Endpoints (JSON)\b0\par
\ul 4.1 System Data (Live)\ul0\par
GET /api/data\par
Purpose: Current telemetry, decision, alerts, and log stats.\par
Response 200 example:\par
{\pard\li360\f0
{\'7b}\par
  "soil_moisture": 640,\par
  "temperature": 29.8,\par
  "humidity": 30.0,\par
  "soil_status": "WET",\par
  "weather": {\par
    "description": "Partly cloudy",\par
    "temperature": 29.0,\par
    "humidity": 45,\par
    "cloud_coverage": 60,\par
    "rain_coming": false,\par
    "precip_mm": 0\par
  },\par
  "decision": "STOP",\par
  "model_decision": "STOP",\par
  "water_saved": 10,\par
  "irrigation_count": 7,\par
  "last_update": "2025-10-18 15:19:08",\par
  "system_status": "Connected",\par
  "alerts": [{\par
    "type":"info","message":"Irrigation #7 activated","time":"15:18:37"\par
  }],\par
  "log_stats": {\par
    "total_entries": 123,\par
    "file_size": "25.31 KB",\par
    "date_range": "2025-10-14 to 2025-10-18"\par
  }\par
{\'7d}\par
}\par
\par
\ul 4.2 Manual Test Actions\ul0\par
GET /api/test/irrigate – Manually send IRRIGATE.\par
Response 200: {"status":"success","message":"Irrigation triggered"}\par
\par
GET /api/test/rain – Manually send RAIN_ALERT.\par
Response 200: {"status":"success","message":"Rain alert triggered"}\par
\par
\ul 4.3 Log Download\ul0\par
GET /api/log/download – Download CSV log (irrigation_data_log.csv).\par
Response: 200, file attachment (Content-Disposition).\par
\par
\ul 4.4 Soil Health Analytics (Historical)\ul0\par
GET /api/soil-health – Historical soil metrics, alerts, farmer summary, Plotly visuals.\par
Notes: visuals.* are Plotly HTML <div> strings; farmer_summary is plain-language guidance.\par
\par
\ul 4.5 Crop Recommendations\ul0\par
POST /api/crop/recommend – Recommend crops for the season.\par
Content-Type: application/json (recommended) or application/x-www-form-urlencoded\par
Request JSON:\par
{\pard\li360\f0
{\'7b}"temperature":26.5,"rainfall":780,"season":"Rainy","soil_type":"Loam"{\'7d}\par
}\par
Response 200 (success):\par
{\pard\li360\f0
{\'7b}\par
  "status":"success",\par
  "input":{\par
    "temperature":26.5,"rainfall":780,"season":"Rainy","soil_type":"Loam"\par
  },\par
  "recommendations":[\par
    {"crop":"Maize","confidence":0.94},\par
    {"crop":"Soybeans","confidence":0.78},\par
    {"crop":"Groundnuts","confidence":0.72}\par
  ],\par
  "best":{\par
    "crop":"Maize","score":0.91,"risk":"Low","message":"Favorable climate match expected."\par
  }\par
{\'7d}\par
}\par
\par
\b 5) Remote Usage (Your PC as a Server)\b0\par
- Start the Flask app locally: python water_harvest_dashboard.py\par
- Ensure your tunnel maps public domain → localhost:5000 (e.g., your ngrok domain).\par
- Share the domain (e.g., https://earlene-unrecognizable-vaughn.ngrok-free.dev).\par
- Your friend’s app replaces http://127.0.0.1:5000 with the public domain in all requests.\par
- CORS is enabled, so browser apps can call the APIs from a different origin.\par
\par
Example (remote cURL):\par
{\pard\li360\f0
curl -s -H "Content-Type: application/json" -X POST \\par
  -d '{"temperature":26.5,"rainfall":780,"season":"Rainy","soil_type":"Loam"}' \\par
  https://earlene-unrecognizable-vaughn.ngrok-free.dev/api/crop/recommend\par
}\par
\par
\b 6) Irrigation Decision Logic (Server + Arduino)\b0\par
- Sensor input from Arduino: DATA,<soil_moisture>,<temperature>,<humidity>\par
- Moisture thresholds (tunable):\par
  - DRY_SOIL_THRESHOLD: < 300 → DRY\par
  - WET_SOIL_THRESHOLD: ≥ 600 → WET\par
  - Edit at: water_harvest_dashboard.py lines 42–44 (also RETRY_WINDOW_SEC=30)\par
- Control output to Arduino: IRRIGATE | STOP | RAIN_ALERT + LED8_ON/OFF (pin 8).\par
- Guardrails:\par
  - Sensor override for safety: if soil is DRY, irrigate even if model says STOP.\par
  - Transition gating: ignore repeated IRRIGATE (send only on state change).\par
  - 30s retry: if still DRY after 30s from last IRRIGATE, re-send IRRIGATE.\par
\par
\b 7) Machine Learning – Irrigation Model\b0\par
Artifacts:\par
- models/irrigation_decision_model_REAL.pkl (classifier), models/model_info_REAL.json (feature schema).\par
Features: Soil_Moisture, Temperature_C, Humidity_Percent, Rain_Coming_Binary, Days_Since_Rain, Hour, Weather_Humidity, Weather_Temp_C.\par
Training data: engineered from irrigation logs (models/processed_irrigation_data.csv).\par
\par
\ul Performance (test split: 10 samples)\ul0\par
precision/recall/f1/support:\par
- IRRIGATE: 1.00 / 1.00 / 1.00 (support 2)\par
- STOP:     1.00 / 1.00 / 1.00 (support 8)\par
accuracy: 1.00\par
macro avg: precision 1.00 / recall 1.00 / f1 1.00 (support 10)\par
weighted avg: precision 1.00 / recall 1.00 / f1 1.00 (support 10)\par
\par
Runtime: builds features from live sensor + weather, predicts IRRIGATE/STOP, then applies safety override, transition gating, and 30s retry before sending the final command to Arduino.\par
\par
\b 8) Soil Health Analytics\b0\par
- Reads historical CSV, cleans timestamps, computes Soil_Health_Score vs ideal moisture (650).\par
- Detects faster-than-normal drying (>20% above historic).\par
- Alerts: TREND DETECTED, SOIL DEGRADATION (<40 score), MOISTURE CRITICAL (<300).\par
- Plotly visuals: last 7/30-day moisture, health score history.\par
- Farmer summary: traffic-light status, “Do now” action, reason, tips, and a simple guide describing the charts.\par
\par
\b 9) Crop Recommendation Engine\b0\par
- Synthetic Zambia-like dataset (models/crop_synthetic_dataset.csv).\par
- Trains models/crop_recommender.pkl if scikit-learn available; else uses rule-based scoring.\par
- API: POST /api/crop/recommend → ranked crops, best crop + risk assessment.\par
- Responsive UI at /crop-recommend (mobile-friendly form).\par
\par
\b 10) Security & Ops Notes\b0\par
- Consider moving weather API keys to environment variables in production.\par
- If exposing publicly, protect sensitive endpoints (/api/test/*) or add a simple token header (X-API-Key).\par
- For hardware reliability, use a separate motor power supply with common ground and flyback diode.\par
- Optionally cache weather (e.g., every 10–15 minutes) to reduce latency.\par
\par
\b 11) Example Client Snippets\b0\par
cURL (local):\par
{\pard\li360\f0 curl -s http://127.0.0.1:5000/api/data\par
}\par
\par
JavaScript (remote):\par
{\pard\li360\f0
const BASE = 'https://earlene-unrecognizable-vaughn.ngrok-free.dev';\par
fetch(`${BASE}/api/data`).then(r=>r.json()).then(console.log);\par
}\par
\par
Python (requests):\par
{\pard\li360\f0
import requests\par
BASE = 'https://earlene-unrecognizable-vaughn.ngrok-free.dev'\par
print(requests.get(f'{BASE}/api/data').json())\par
payload = {"temperature":26.5,"rainfall":780,"season":"Rainy","soil_type":"Loam"}\par
print(requests.post(f'{BASE}/api/crop/recommend', json=payload).json())\par
}\par
\par
\b 12) Configuration Quick Reference\b0\par
- Moisture thresholds & retry window: water_harvest_dashboard.py lines 42–44\par
- LED policy & command sending: process_arduino_data() in water_harvest_dashboard.py\par
- Soil analytics config: soil_health_monitor.py (IDEAL_MOISTURE, visuals)\par
- Crop model/data: crop_recommendation.py and models/*\par
\par
\par
\b End of Document\b0\par
}
